introducing Barbara London who we're
delighted to have here all the way from
New York thank you for coming Barbara
Barbara
um started the video uh exhibition
collection at the Museum of Modern Art
uh where she worked for 40
years um also has a recent book out
called video art the first 50 years
which I can highly recommend and a
podcast called Barbara London Calling
get it
yeah um which I can also wholeheartedly
recommend you check out um Barbara
[Applause]
please okay thank
you just put this down move the mic a
bit okay thank you all for turning out
thank you Barry for um this invitation
it's a delight to be here um
I'm just so pleased you all
came so let's
see all right I am from New York um my
father worked in the Empire State
Building if you can believe it and for
me uh the world was New York and maybe
San Francisco maybe LA and maybe Japan
on the other side of the
Pacific so growing up in New York I
always loved music and I always love
technology my grandfather was an
inventor um so to me the whole hybridity
of our culture is so important and I
love um the fil more East and what they
were doing with music and
imagery indeed I worked at MoMA for 40
years and I loved that early on in the
30s Alfred Bar put that little sign up
it had to do with a show that was on
view art in our time art is always
evolving because you as artists you as
thinking people were responding to
what's
happening when I started at MoMA the
video had
already the consumer video camera had
already come on the market AR picked it
up it was Nam June P Andy Warhol Les
LaVine Joan Jonas and a number of others
and the whole idea of working against
what the big Corporation Called
television was doing it was
then the poetic the um individual voice
and that was what was of interest to
me I was very interested in people like
Jan Jonas artist who picked up the
portable camera and worked with the flaw
the um vertical role so
she bridged and she continues to work
she's in her mid 80s she continues to
bridge um art
technology um really working with
systems but also she's also very much a
part of the work um you see
her she did a performance in 1975 she
updated it in 76 it was at the Anthology
film archives on Wester Street Joan
lived around the
corner and in anthology she was able to
develop this work which had film it had
video it had a lot of
promts so I show it
because you as artists you're going to
you do already you will rework a lot of
what you did and you'll continue to do
that and if you work with technology
you're going to have to upgrade it
because who's going to have that
equipment or who's going to be able to
find that software that ran your
Machinery so Joan did that work as a
performance she also turned it into an
installation with the various props so I
got that work into the M collection
so having seen it through all of the
different iterations was important um
and I always joke that my credit lines
on the work that I got into the
collection was often very long because
it took me a year to to get all of the
money raised um
so video
technology it's not on the tip of
every Museum's tongue um
so the curators we have to do a lot of
work to explain what it is how relevant
it is um how important it is and then
how important it is to take care of
it so Joan Works big and she works also
very small and that fascinates me that
she's able to do that so this piece I
got into the collection also and it's a
teeny tiny theater in this teeny tiny um
plywood designed and built
um structure and it has all of her props
I think there's a rabbit there's a video
playing um
and just all her her wonderful
magic another artist who I have admired
a lot I just did a show with her at the
Prada foundation in uh Milan and that's
darra berbal who worked really really
hard with some of her early videos to
get her hands
on um normal commercial television like
um Wonder Woman so she had many friends
in the TV business TV World um industry
and they would get her they would
purloin the material so that she could
then work with it so she was a genius
she is still a genius of editing
um so I'm very fortunate I um traveled
to Japan starting in the 70s and I had
two sabatical there and I got to know
very well an artist named taji
fashi who co-founded with a couple of
other artists a group called dump type
and um I saw this installation in Tokyo
in
95 and then no 94 and then I put it into
a show I did called video
spaces so we can mute the sound it's
yeah um so it's a quite complex work I
don't know maybe some of you saw it a
couple of years ago it was renovated and
put back to sort of to the way it was it
had different various problems um when
an he sadly died of
AIDS two weeks after the M show closed
and that was very um I get goosebumps it
was very um sad for me I learned a lot
about Japanese culture through Tei he
was from Kyoto and Tokyo Kyoto they're
very very different um but there was
there's something so magical in this
work that's performative it's very
technological very beautiful very
haunting um it stops you dead in your
tracks um when you um see it so
there are multiple video projectors
there were um in the work there are
slides there's text it's very specific
space um Black Walls the videos are
projected on the Black Walls so the
figures are moving and they're very much
um they specters it's it's like and the
work is called lovers so it's really
love in the time of AIDS um
so just to tell you about my practice I
did a lot of different things in the in
my curatorial time but always I was
fascinated by Sound by music by the
connection between the Visual Arts and
Music so I actually did three shows
called um looking at music the first one
I looked at say Jack Smith and Joan
Jonas Joan went to Jack Smith's
performances and he had an impact on her
so it's like art it's always there's
always this back and forth and dialogue
that goes on sometimes it's known the
two people know each other but sometimes
it's just you might have seen something
and that opens a door um in the thinking
so the this is the third in the series
and I was fascinated um
with what was going on with music with
art then and when I did a show at MoMA I
was always I had a budget and I was
always trying to push the budget so I
show you the title wall because I got
three people to design posters um say
Adams who was de Jam Kim Gordon from
Sonic Youth and Lori Anderson to design
posters those were sold in the MoMA
bookstore so I got bookstore to
underwrite the production of them I also
got the MoMA summer garden people to
underwrite a music program so um I got
the Beasty Boys I got all kinds of
people um so that was always how I kind
of expanded upon what I was
doing the very last show I did at MoMA
was called um um soundings a
contemporary score I'd wanted to do a
big sound show for for a very long time
um I proposed it first in
1979 M said no and it's that's because I
I'm sure it's a visual place and back at
that time in particular um visual you
know sound was a menace you know it
travels and how do you control contain
sound so back then I did a very small
show and
um that's in certain history books but
um when I proposed this
show I got a yes immediately and I was
fortunate I spent two years working on
it and worked with the MoMA AV crew I
worked with the um exhibition designer
right from the very beginning because I
wanted to design the spaces I wanted to
really make sure I could fit the work
into the space so and I also expanded a
that I said why don't can't I use the um
area outside the exhibition space and
that's where I put Zar Chon's piece and
my husband said you're going to fry The
public's butt um because it's through
bone conduction um you sat on this old
Subway bench and you heard Serge's um
composition and it was quite wonderful
because he took Ambient sound from the
space um I traveled a bit to do the
research for the
show I was fascinated by what's going on
in
Scandinavia um and this is a very
interesting artist Camille
Norman who works with sound and she
works with sculpture um but I loved this
piece because it's actually a very
old-fashioned microphone that she took
apart she took the guts out and inside
she put a little light
and the light is programmed to
pulsate sort of like a heartbeat
so you walk up to it and what is our
voice what is our heartbeat um so the
voice comes from deep within um so it
it's a very simple work basically you
saw the microphone and you saw sort of
the rib cage on the wall which is really
the
microphone another artist um Camille
happens to live in Oslo another artist
lives there as well Yana werin Yana goes
to um sort of the ends of the Earth and
she puts her microphone very sensitive
microphone into the water and she
captures the sound of fish communicating
who knew that fish communicate vocally
um and who knew that those big big boats
that are out there carrying all kinds of
produce not produce but manufacturing
goods are killing the um ability of
certain fish to communicate um because
they call out and now these boats are
you know in the middle oops I didn't
want to go there go back oops let's see
I want to go back um so anyway so Jana
created a space very y I worked closely
with each of the artists in the show and
it's very dark there were cushions there
were um I forget how many speakers there
were maybe 16 um and the sound went from
underwater you heard the the fish
communicating it went physically up to
the level of you and your body and that
was the surface of the water and you
heard the AE of her canoe going in and
you heard the boat
bugs buzzing and then up higher speakers
you
heard the echol of bats so how do bats
communicate or how do they travel
because they're blind they're putting
out a sound that we is inaudible to us
but they know when there's a hard
surface or a soft surface which is an
animal and their dinner right
um so it was a very beautiful simple
haunting piece
um let's see if I can go on I got
locked I'm going back I want to oh go
forward
okay I'm sorry little okay so soundings
at contemporary score was the last show
I did at MoMA after 40 years it was time
for me to step down and turn the Reigns
over to someone else and Stuart comr has
been doing a great job so what was going
to do I'm not going to sit on my hands
um so I decided I would write a book and
it took me a while to get my voice
because when you work very long time in
an institution you become the
institution and whatever I wrote for
Moma wall label whatever um catalog text
it was dry cleaned and my voice was kind
of taken out but that's okay that's the
institution that's the way they go so
took me a while to get my voice in a way
I was very fortunate that fiden
immediately agreed to publish it and it
meant that um they would handle all the
photographs and things um so I worked
really hard I worked several years on it
it's in its third printing I'm happy to
say um so it went to came
out I had a book tour planned and then
covid
came so so I was home all the artists I
knew were
home and what was I going to do I was
going to create a podcast Series so I
was very lucky that I got the funding um
pretty quickly and I got really amazing
people to be in dialogue with me on reca
a number um there were 12 artists
um so that was quite exciting I have a
producer I also did season two but
around that time right before Co hit I
decided I wanted to do another sound
show and this time not for a Moma scale
but for a small scale and
um so that's the podcast so you can
listen to it it's on Spotify it's on
Apple and it's just ww Barber london.net
you can find it all the transcripts are
there then I decid Ed this show I would
call it seeing sound I came up with the
idea of who the artist would be and I
went to noia and I said I knew the man
who was the giving person I said hey I
got a show he said hey I'll give you 50
Grand then I thought I'm only me I can't
do a show with that money so fortunately
I went to ICI independent curators
International they're very committed to
curators and they took the show on so so
it's very
International um it will open at Pratt
galleries on 14th Street September
26 so if you're in New York please come
um But it includes Seth Kitt who's a
faculty member at Colombia Ian fory and
Jane Pard Bonnie hael from Singapore
Yuko Mori Marina Rosenfeld or assat
Samson youngan Cortez and
that's it
so that's Bonny hael he founded a a a a
rock band in Singapore but he's very
very very involved with language as
musician singers often are and he is of
a Muslim ethnicity in Singapore so he's
he created a software that translates
what you the ordinary mortal right in
through the keyboard and then he
translates it into
sound let's see I'll go forward um also
orat very interesting artist based in
London she did this sound piece where
it's
actually a conversation between the
wonderful composer poin olos and Lori
Spiegel about the Drone and what is a
drone it's that icky awful sound when
there's a siren the fire trucks or the
ambulance that goes by so it's what we
hear but we then block out it's because
it's very um unpleasant but they're
talking about the two in the dialogue
how they work with the
Drone so the show was at haford um last
year it
was here's M Yuko Mor who repesent in
Japan in Venice at the banial recently
so who knew that fruit talks
so this is the sound she put um she's
getting the sound of the fruit as it's
sort of decomposing um so it it's the
work like this is a responsibility of
the institution showing
it and this is Seth's piece which is
quite wonderful so he audiotaped a um
Park in the north part of Manhattan
where do we go from here
I'm doing season 3 I've got shulie
Chang um who's just phenomenal artist
who pushes all the boundaries um I'll go
quickly she's of sex of just everything
you can think of um this was her piece
in Venice in 19 20
2019 um and what I loved about her
installation is I'm going into the the
red I have to cut um I love that she
showed the guts what runs her piece you
know it was right there often a curator
will hide that away so that's pretty
much it that's shuely if you're in
London in February you can see her
collaboration with donon
hang
um Josh Klein will be in dialogue with
me and he has a show that just opened at
um at um listen Gallery so if you're in
New York so that's sort of it I'm
fascinated by this young group
cfgny they're they're using fashion as a
medium so and the crls here in San
Francisco Bay Area are very important so
anyway that's
[Applause]
it thanks Barbara we're just going to
chat here for a minute we'll hand us oh
don't go away don't go away don't go
away don't go away no we aren't oh want
me to yeah we're gonna say hi for a
second while Hannah sets up the next
person
um for all of the aspiring young
curators out there
today if you were going to start a
program today would it be video art like
you did at MoMA or would you have a new
framing around would you have a new
framing around a collection like Yeah
from what you're seeing going on today
would it be a different sort of thing or
oh it would be very different because
I'm always interested in the present so
and of course when I started it was
video I was fascinated by what artists
like Nam Jun what Joan what um I I went
to Japan to seek out the Japanese artist
in
7576 so you know I'm interested in the
present um but then yeah so today like I
just showed you Josh Klein I just showed
you CFG and Y you know they're they're
fascinating to me so they don't
necessarily use media but Josh is very
interesting because the do the
conversation I just had with him in his
Studio he said what he's doing with 3D
modeling is very much like early
video the technology is so crude
you can make all kinds of things with 3D
modeling but how do you control the
color it's goddamn complex you know so
you're like really struggling you know
so anyway yeah and you know we've done a
lot with um expanded Cinema here we
worked with gan gan Young Blood a lot
with a book who you mention in video art
um and a lot has sort of H I think a lot
of people think about that as a historic
period but really we kind of see it as a
continuation all the way of course um so
do you think museums are equipped for
this kind of work now or how or do you
see any museums that you're looking at
that are like
particularly um on top of it presenting
this new kind of like you know we have
all these new sort of place based
immersive things video projections on
walls some of which are commercial some
of which are bad some of which are okay
some of which are good I don't know what
is look at the space what do you yeah
well I think um there are institutions
that are
very um on top of it and they have
people like here in San Francisco you've
got Ruda freeling you've got you know
you've got people who are that's their
their
area but I really feel we're in a very
complex time it's not fun right now for
institutions so you maybe are reading
that Glenn Lowry is stepping down well
it's it's complex so you know they've
got to keep these the big ones got to
keep the Behemoth um on on track or take
it move it off course slightly so it's
you and the smaller institutions that
have a better chance in a way because
you can move on a dime you know you've
got your space you know how it functions
you create a situation like this for the
dialogue which is so important that's